doc/guides/west/config.rst, before:

.. _west-config:

Configuration
#############

This page documents west's configuration file system, the ``west config``
command, and configuration options used by built-in commands. For API
documentation on the ``west.configuration`` module, see
:ref:`west-apis-configuration`.

West Configuration Files
------------------------

West's configuration file syntax is INI-like; here is an example file:

.. code-block:: ini

   [manifest]
   path = zephyr

   [zephyr]
   base = zephyr

Above, the ``manifest`` section has option ``path`` set to ``zephyr``. Another
way to say the same thing is that ``manifest.path`` is ``zephyr`` in this file.

There are three types of configuration file:

1. **System**: Settings in this file affect west's behavior for every user
   logged in to the computer. Its location depends on the platform:

   - Linux: :file:`/etc/westconfig`
   - macOS: :file:`/usr/local/etc/westconfig`
   - Windows: :file:`%PROGRAMDATA%\\west\\config`

2. **Global** (per user): Settings in this file affect how west behaves when
   run by a particular user on the computer.

   - All platforms: the default is :file:`.westconfig` in the user's home
     directory.
   - Linux note: if the environment variable :envvar:`XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set,
     then :file:`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/west/config` is used.
   - Windows note: the following environment variables are tested to find the
     home directory: :envvar:`%HOME%`, then :envvar:`%USERPROFILE%`, then a
     combination of :envvar:`%HOMEDRIVE%` and :envvar:`%HOMEPATH%`.

3. **Local**: Settings in this file affect west's behavior for the
   current :term:`west installation`. The file is :file:`.west/config`, relative
   to the installation's root directory.

A setting in a file which appears lower down on this list overrides an earlier
setting. For example, if ``color.ui`` is ``true`` in the system's configuration
file, but ``false`` in the installation's, then the final value is
``false``. Similarly, settings in the user configuration file override system
settings, and so on.

.. _west-config-cmd:

West ``config`` Command
-----------------------

The built-in ``config`` command can be used to get and set configuration
values. You can pass ``west config`` the options ``--system``, ``--global``, or
``--local`` to specify which configuration file to use. Only one of these can
be used at a time. If none is given, then writes default to ``--local``, and
reads show the final value after applying overrides.

Some examples for common uses follow; run ``west config -h`` for detailed help,
and see :ref:`west-config-index` for more details on built-in options.

To set ``manifest.path`` to :file:`some-other-manifest`:

.. code-block:: console

   west config manifest.path some-other-manifest

Doing the above means that commands like ``west update`` will look for the
:term:`west manifest` inside the :file:`some-other-manifest` directory
(relative to the installation root directory) instead of the directory given to
``west init``, so be careful!

To read ``zephyr.base``, the value which will be used as ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` if it
is unset in the calling environment (also relative to the installation root):

.. code-block:: console

   west config zephyr.base

You can switch to another zephyr repository without changing ``manifest.path``
-- and thus the behavior of commands like ``west update`` -- using:

.. code-block:: console

   west config zephyr.base some-other-zephyr

This can be useful if you use commands like ``git worktree`` to create your own
zephyr directories, and want commands like ``west build`` to use them instead
of the zephyr repository specified in the manifest. (You can go back to using
the directory in the upstream manifest by running ``west config zephyr.base
zephyr``.)

To set ``color.ui`` to ``false`` in the global (user-wide) configuration file,
so that west will no longer print colored output for that user when run in any
installation:

.. code-block:: console

   west config --global color.ui false

To undo the above change:

.. code-block:: console

   west config --global color.ui true

.. _west-config-index:

Built-in Configuration Options
------------------------------

The following table documents configuration options supported by west's
built-in commands. Configuration options supported by Zephyr's extension
commands are documented in the pages for those commands.

.. NOTE: docs authors: keep this table sorted by section, then option.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``color.ui``
     - Boolean. If ``true`` (the default), then west output is colorized when
       stdout is a terminal.
   * - ``commands.allow_extensions``
     - Boolean, default ``true``, disables :ref:`west-extensions` if ``false``
   * - ``manifest.path``
     - String, relative path from the :term:`west installation` root directory
       to the manifest repository used by ``west update`` and other commands
       which parse the manifest. Set locally by ``west init``.
   * - ``zephyr.base``
     - String, default value to set for the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_BASE` environment
       variable while the west command is running. By default, this is set to
       the path to the manifest project with path :file:`zephyr` (if there is
       one) during ``west init``. If the variable is already set, then this
       setting is ignored unless ``zephyr.base-prefer`` is ``"configfile"``.
   * - ``zephyr.base-prefer``
     - String, one the values ``"env"`` and ``"configfile"``. If set to
       ``"env"`` (the default), setting :envvar:`ZEPHYR_BASE` in the calling
       environment overrides the value of the ``zephyr.base`` configuration
       option. If set to ``"configfile"``, the configuration option wins
       instead.

Commit message:

doc: west: add v0.6.1 documentation
West v0.6.1 has been released. The main feature is that "west update"
now avoids communicating with the network by default when project
revisions have already been fetched.

This allows for offline operation and significantly speeds up the
command (it's 10 times faster on my machine and home network).

There are other miscellaneous changes as well; document them also.

Signed-off-by: Marti Bolivar <marti.bolivar@nordicsemi.no>

doc/guides/west/config.rst, after:

.. _west-config:

Configuration
#############

This page documents west's configuration file system, the ``west config``
command, and configuration options used by built-in commands. For API
documentation on the ``west.configuration`` module, see
:ref:`west-apis-configuration`.

West Configuration Files
------------------------

West's configuration file syntax is INI-like; here is an example file:

.. code-block:: ini

   [manifest]
   path = zephyr

   [zephyr]
   base = zephyr

Above, the ``manifest`` section has option ``path`` set to ``zephyr``. Another
way to say the same thing is that ``manifest.path`` is ``zephyr`` in this file.

There are three types of configuration file:

1. **System**: Settings in this file affect west's behavior for every user
   logged in to the computer. Its location depends on the platform:

   - Linux: :file:`/etc/westconfig`
   - macOS: :file:`/usr/local/etc/westconfig`
   - Windows: :file:`%PROGRAMDATA%\\west\\config`

2. **Global** (per user): Settings in this file affect how west behaves when
   run by a particular user on the computer.

   - All platforms: the default is :file:`.westconfig` in the user's home
     directory.
   - Linux note: if the environment variable :envvar:`XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set,
     then :file:`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/west/config` is used.
   - Windows note: the following environment variables are tested to find the
     home directory: :envvar:`%HOME%`, then :envvar:`%USERPROFILE%`, then a
     combination of :envvar:`%HOMEDRIVE%` and :envvar:`%HOMEPATH%`.

3. **Local**: Settings in this file affect west's behavior for the
   current :term:`west installation`. The file is :file:`.west/config`, relative
   to the installation's root directory.

A setting in a file which appears lower down on this list overrides an earlier
setting. For example, if ``color.ui`` is ``true`` in the system's configuration
file, but ``false`` in the installation's, then the final value is
``false``. Similarly, settings in the user configuration file override system
settings, and so on.

.. _west-config-cmd:

West ``config`` Command
-----------------------

The built-in ``config`` command can be used to get and set configuration
values. You can pass ``west config`` the options ``--system``, ``--global``, or
``--local`` to specify which configuration file to use. Only one of these can
be used at a time. If none is given, then writes default to ``--local``, and
reads show the final value after applying overrides.

Some examples for common uses follow; run ``west config -h`` for detailed help,
and see :ref:`west-config-index` for more details on built-in options.

To set ``manifest.path`` to :file:`some-other-manifest`:

.. code-block:: console

   west config manifest.path some-other-manifest

Doing the above means that commands like ``west update`` will look for the
:term:`west manifest` inside the :file:`some-other-manifest` directory
(relative to the installation root directory) instead of the directory given to
``west init``, so be careful!

To read ``zephyr.base``, the value which will be used as ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` if it
is unset in the calling environment (also relative to the installation root):

.. code-block:: console

   west config zephyr.base

You can switch to another zephyr repository without changing ``manifest.path``
-- and thus the behavior of commands like ``west update`` -- using:

.. code-block:: console

   west config zephyr.base some-other-zephyr

This can be useful if you use commands like ``git worktree`` to create your own
zephyr directories, and want commands like ``west build`` to use them instead
of the zephyr repository specified in the manifest. (You can go back to using
the directory in the upstream manifest by running ``west config zephyr.base
zephyr``.)

To set ``color.ui`` to ``false`` in the global (user-wide) configuration file,
so that west will no longer print colored output for that user when run in any
installation:

.. code-block:: console

   west config --global color.ui false

To undo the above change:

.. code-block:: console

   west config --global color.ui true

.. _west-config-index:

Built-in Configuration Options
------------------------------

The following table documents configuration options supported by west's
built-in commands. Configuration options supported by Zephyr's extension
commands are documented in the pages for those commands.

.. NOTE: docs authors: keep this table sorted by section, then option.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``color.ui``
     - Boolean. If ``true`` (the default), then west output is colorized when
       stdout is a terminal.
   * - ``commands.allow_extensions``
     - Boolean, default ``true``, disables :ref:`west-extensions` if ``false``
   * - ``manifest.path``
     - String, relative path from the :term:`west installation` root directory
       to the manifest repository used by ``west update`` and other commands
       which parse the manifest. Set locally by ``west init``.
   * - ``update.fetch``
     - String, one of ``"smart"`` (the default behavior starting in v0.6.1) or
       ``"always"`` (the previous behavior). If set to ``"smart"``, the
       :ref:`west update <west-multi-repo-cmds>` command will skip fetching
       from project remotes when those projects' revisions in the manifest file
       are SHAs or tags which are already available locally. The ``"always"``
       behavior is to unconditionally fetch from the remote.
   * - ``zephyr.base``
     - String, default value to set for the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_BASE` environment
       variable while the west command is running. By default, this is set to
       the path to the manifest project with path :file:`zephyr` (if there is
       one) during ``west init``. If the variable is already set, then this
       setting is ignored unless ``zephyr.base-prefer`` is ``"configfile"``.
   * - ``zephyr.base-prefer``
     - String, one the values ``"env"`` and ``"configfile"``. If set to
       ``"env"`` (the default), setting :envvar:`ZEPHYR_BASE` in the calling
       environment overrides the value of the ``zephyr.base`` configuration
       option. If set to ``"configfile"``, the configuration option wins
       instead.
