samples/subsys/shell/fs/README.rst, before:

.. _shell-fs-sample:

File system shell example
#########################

Overview
********

This example provides shell access to a NFFS file system partition in flash.

Requirements
************

A board with NFFS file system support and UART console

Building
********

Native Posix
============

Before starting a build, make sure that the i386 pkconfig directory is in your
search path and that a 32-bit version of libfuse is installed. For more
background information on this requirement see :ref:`native_posix`.

.. code-block:: console

  export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=/usr/lib/i386-linux-gnu/pkgconfig

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/subsys/shell/fs
   :board: native_posix
   :goals: build
   :compact:

See :ref:`native_posix` on how to connect to the UART.

Reel Board
==========

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/subsys/shell/fs
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: build
   :compact:

Running
*******

Once the board has booted, you will be presented with a shell prompt.
All file system related commands are available as sub-commands of fs.

Begin by mounting the NFSS file system.

.. code-block:: console

  fs mount nffs /nffs

Files System Shell Commands
===========================

Mount
-----

Mount a file system partition to a given mount point

.. code-block:: console

  fs mount (nffs|fat) <path>

Ls
--

List all files and directories in a given path

.. code-block:: console

  fs ls [path]

Cd
--

Change current working directory to given path

.. code-block:: console

  fs cd [path]

Pwd
---

List current working directory

.. code-block:: console

  fs pwd

Write
-----

Write hexadecimal numbers to a given file.
Optionally a offset in the file can be given.

.. code-block:: console

  fs write <path> [-o <offset>] <hex number> ...

Read
----

Read file and dump in hex and ASCII format

.. code-block:: console

  fs read <path>

Trunc
-----

Truncate a given file

.. code-block:: console

  fs trunc <path>

Mkdir
-----

Create a directory

.. code-block:: console

  fs mkdir <path>

Rm
--

Remove a file or directory

.. code-block:: console

  fs rm <path>

Flash Host Access
=================

For the Native POSIX board the flash partitions can be accessed from the host
Linux system.

By default the flash partitions are accessible through the directory *flash*
relative to the directory where the build is started.

Commit message:

subsys/fs/shell: add littlefs support
Add support for the littlefs file system in the fs shell.  Update
the sample to use the same partition configuration as the littlefs
example for the SPI NOR test platform.

Signed-off-by: Peter A. Bigot <pab@pabigot.com>

samples/subsys/shell/fs/README.rst, after:

.. _shell-fs-sample:

File system shell example
#########################

Overview
********

This example provides shell access to a NFFS file system partition in flash.

Requirements
************

A board with NFFS file system support and UART console

Building
********

Native Posix
============

Before starting a build, make sure that the i386 pkconfig directory is in your
search path and that a 32-bit version of libfuse is installed. For more
background information on this requirement see :ref:`native_posix`.

.. code-block:: console

  export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=/usr/lib/i386-linux-gnu/pkgconfig

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/subsys/shell/fs
   :board: native_posix
   :goals: build
   :compact:

See :ref:`native_posix` on how to connect to the UART.

Reel Board
==========

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/subsys/shell/fs
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: build
   :compact:

Particle Xenon
==============

This target is customized to support the same SPI NOR partition table as
the :ref:`littlefs-sample`.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/subsys/shell/fs
   :board: particle_xenon
   :goals: build
   :compact:

Running
*******

Once the board has booted, you will be presented with a shell prompt.
All file system related commands are available as sub-commands of fs.

Begin by mounting the NFSS file system.

.. code-block:: console

  fs mount nffs /nffs

Files System Shell Commands
===========================

Mount
-----

Mount a file system partition to a given mount point

.. code-block:: console

  fs mount (nffs|fat) <path>

Ls
--

List all files and directories in a given path

.. code-block:: console

  fs ls [path]

Cd
--

Change current working directory to given path

.. code-block:: console

  fs cd [path]

Pwd
---

List current working directory

.. code-block:: console

  fs pwd

Write
-----

Write hexadecimal numbers to a given file.
Optionally a offset in the file can be given.

.. code-block:: console

  fs write <path> [-o <offset>] <hex number> ...

Read
----

Read file and dump in hex and ASCII format

.. code-block:: console

  fs read <path>

Trunc
-----

Truncate a given file

.. code-block:: console

  fs trunc <path>

Mkdir
-----

Create a directory

.. code-block:: console

  fs mkdir <path>

Rm
--

Remove a file or directory

.. code-block:: console

  fs rm <path>

Flash Host Access
=================

For the Native POSIX board the flash partitions can be accessed from the host
Linux system.

By default the flash partitions are accessible through the directory *flash*
relative to the directory where the build is started.
